feat: TLS certificate rotation (#678)
Azure/aks-engine: docs/topics/certificaterotation.md

> # Cluster certificate rotation

Author: doc is still in progress

> Instructions on how to rotate TLS CA and certs for an AKS Engine cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instructions on rotating TLS CA and certificates for an AKS Engine cluster.
```

## Prerequesites

- Kubernetes version 1.8.0 or later is required

> - The etcd members MUST be in healthy state before rotating the CA and certs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The etcd members MUST be in a healthy state before rotating the CA and certs.
```

> - The `_output` directory for your cluster deployment, including working SSH key for accessing the master nodes and `kubeconfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `_output` directory for your cluster deployment, including a working SSH key for accessing the master nodes and `kubeconfig`.
```

## Preparation

**CAUTION**: Before rotation, it's preferrable to back up your cluster:

1. On an etcd node, take a backup of the current state.
2. //TODO recommend etcd backup tool, extract the existing state from etcd. Copy this back to your working machine as a precaution, in case the control plane goes down.

> 3. Keep a copy of your current _output directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Keep a copy of your current _output directory.
```

## Rotation

**CAUTION**: Rotating certificates will cause cluster downtime

run `aks-engine rotate-certs`

`aks-engine rotate-certs` will:

> - Use part of the AKS-Engine deploy code to generate the certificates we need, using the same cert properties and default expiration as new cluster certs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use a part of the AKS-Engine deploy code to generate the required certificates by using the same certificate properties and default expiration as the new ones.
```

Author: I reworded to make the sentence more clear.

> - From master rotate etcd CA and certificates in all masters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rotate etcd CA and certificates in all of the master nodes.
```

> - From master rotate CA and certs in the nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Unneeded?

Author: there's a missing word. I think it should be apiserver certificates.

> - Update kubeconfig and rotate the kubelet certs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update the kubeconfig and rotate the kubelet certificates.
```

# Cluster certificate rotation

Instructions on rotating TLS CA and certificates for an AKS Engine cluster.

## Prerequesites

- Kubernetes version 1.8.0 or later is required

> - The etcd members MUST be in a healthy state before rotating the CA and certs.

Reviewer 2: We might want to specify more details. I assume you mean that not only is an elected leader actively serving requests, but that all nodes in the cluster are online and available? Or is it only important that they have a working configuration, and not that they literally have to be online?

Author: I think the easiest way to meet that requirement is to check that when you run `etcdctl cluster-health` all peers are healthy and cluster is healthy.

> - The `_output` directory for your cluster deployment, including a working SSH key for accessing the master nodes and `kubeconfig`.

Reviewer 2: Why do we need the `_output` directory? Is it just for these two requirements? This might be better stated:

- A working ssh private key that has root access to all master nodes, and a working `kubeconfig` file in order to establish an authenticated connection to the Kubernetes cluster API. These files are persisted at AKS Engine template generation time, by default to the `_output/` child directory from the working parent directory at the time of the `aks-engine` invocation.

(or something like that)

Author: 👍

## Preparation

**CAUTION**: Before rotation, it's preferrable to back up your cluster:

> 1. On an etcd node, take a backup of the current state.

Reviewer 2: Do you need to do this on an etcd node literally? Can you do this from anywhere that has an authenticated connection to the etcd cluster?

Author: I don't know, the etcd backup is mostly TODO, it's not part of the cert-rotation functionality I'm adding, it's a pre-req for which we will provide a tool recommendation (@palma21 was going to look into that). These are just standard instructions I got from the coreos website.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, the user can do it without directly hopping into the node, but that is one option.

Suggest we generalize it as
Backup the etcd cluster data

2. //TODO recommend etcd backup tool, extract the existing state from etcd. Copy this back to your working machine as a precaution, in case the control plane goes down.

> 3. Keep a copy of your current _output directory.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what the distinction is between this guidance and the prerequisite guidance above.

Author: true, there isn't one. Will remove one of them.

## Rotation

**CAUTION**: Rotating certificates will cause cluster downtime.

run `aks-engine rotate-certs`

`aks-engine rotate-certs` will:

> - Use the exisiting certificate generation code to generate new certificates, using the same certificate properties and default expiration as new certificates generated for new clusters.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to mention "Use the existing certificate genaration code" here? I think "Generate new certificates" is good enough.

Author: Yeah I'll remove that, that was mostly when I was trying to make this a design doc by describing the implementation.

- Rotate etcd CA and certificates in all of the master nodes.
- From the first master node, rotate apiserver certificates in the nodes.
- Update the kubeconfig and rotate the kubelet certificates.

## Reboot Cluster

After updating the CA and certs of the API server, we need to restart all the pods to ensure they refresh their service account.

This can be done by rebooting all the nodes in the cluster.

// TODO: add `aks-engine` reboot command

## Verification

After the above steps, you can verify the success of the CA and certs rotation:

> - Old  `kubeconfig`  should  **NOT**  be able to contact the API server, however the new kubeconfig should be able to talk to it.

Reviewer 2: We might consider writing a general purpose script to do this validation (might be useful apart from cert rotation context):

`aks-engine validate --kubeconfig=<path-to-kube-config> --api-model=<path-to-api-model>`

Or maybe we can parse the template/params to get the validation input (number of nodes, etc), either via a local file or via running an `az`-like command against the resource group.

Author: Good idea, that would be phase 2 though. Phase 1 will focus on the cert rotation itself.

Reviewer 3: @jackfrancis what would that validate command do exactly we can spec it for phase two or independently if it makes more sense.

# Cluster certificate rotation

Instructions on rotating TLS CA and certificates for an AKS Engine cluster.

## Prerequesites

- The etcd members MUST be in a healthy state before rotating the CA and certs (ie. `etcdctl cluster-health` shows all peers are healthy and cluster is healthy).
- The apimodel file reflecting the current cluster configuration and a working ssh private key that has root access to all nodes. The apimodel file is persisted at AKS Engine template generation time, by default to the _output/ child directory from the working parent directory at the time of the aks-engine invocation.

<a name="preparation"></a>

## Preparation

**CAUTION**: Rotating certificates can break component connectivity and leave the cluster in an unrecoverable state. Before performing any of these instructions on a live cluster, it is preferrable to backup your cluster state and migrate critical workloads to another cluster.

## Rotation

**CAUTION**: Rotating certificates will cause cluster downtime.

run `aks-engine rotate-certs`. For example:

```bash

> CLUSTER="<CLUSTER_DNS_PREFIX>" && bin/aks-engine rotate-certs --apimodel _output/${CLUSTER}/apimodel.json --client-id "<YOUR_CLIENT_ID>" --client-secret "<YOUR_CLIENT_SECRET>" --location <CLUSTER_LOCATION> --master-FQDN ${CLUSTER}.<CLUSTER_LOCATION>.cloudapp.azure.com --ssh _output/${CLUSTER}-ssh --subscription-id "<YOUR_SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" -g ${CLUSTER} -o _output/${CLUSTER}

Reviewer 4: This command needs to change to `api-model` with a hyphen now. My fault.

Author: fixed

Reviewer 4: Also, could you break this up with backslashes into several shorter lines? Currently it renders into markdown as one long line with a horizontal scrollbar.

```

The above example command assumes a default `output/` directory with the resource group name being the same as the cluster's DNS prefix.

`aks-engine rotate-certs` will:

- Generate new certificates.
- Rotate apiserver certificates.
- Rotate the kubelet certificates.
- Rotate etcd CA and certificates and restart etcd in all of the master nodes.
- Update the kubeconfig.
- Reboot all the VMs in the resource group.
- Restart all the pods to ensure they refresh their service account.

## Verification

After the above steps, you can verify the success of the CA and certs rotation:

> - Old  `kubeconfig`  should  **NOT**  be able to contact the API server, however the new kubeconfig should be able to talk to it.

Reviewer 4: I would start with "The": ``` The old `kubeconfig` should ```

- All nodes are expected to be  `Ready`, all pods are expected to be  `Running`.

> - Try to fetch the logs of  `kube-apiserver`,  `kube-scheduler`  and  `kube-controller-namager`, they should all be running correctly without spitting errors. E.g. ```kubectl logs -lk8s-app=kube-scheduler -n kube-system`.

Reviewer 4: s/spitting/printing/

Reviewer 4: Could you put a period after kube-controller-manager and start a new sentence?
``` 
... and `kube-controller-manager`. They should all be...
```

Reviewer 4: The command here should start with a single backtick to render correctly.

## Known Limitations

The certificate rotation tool has not been tested on and is expected to fail with the following cluster configurations:

- Private clusters.
- Clusters using keyvault references in Certificate Profile.
- Clusters using Cosmos etcd.
- Clusters with already expired certificates with unhealthy etcd.

The rotation involves rebooting the nodes. ALL VMs in the resource group will be restarted as part of running the `rotate-certs` command. If the resource group contains any VMs that are not part of the cluster, they will be restarted as well.

> The tool is not currently idempotent, meaning that if the rotation fails halfway though or is interrupted, you will most likely not be able to re-run the operation without any manual intervention. There is a risk that your cluster will become unrecoverable which is why it is strongly recommended to follow the steps in the [preparation step](#preparation).

Reviewer 4: Remove "any": `re-run the operation without manual intervention.`

We say "step" twice, so maybe reword the last part as:
```
...to follow the [preparation steps](#preparation).
```
